missed you completely would you please stop it
testing one two three stop it please we don't have
much
the first question is um what were some of the
highlights of your years in the house of
representatives
well it depends on whose opinion in your opinion it
takes uh I guess
being leader of the
time that Termin was Speaker of the House, and one
of the, I guess, aggressive things that I was
chairman of the committee that made University of
Houston was a fully state-supported school.
Before
this bill was passed, it was supported as a junior
college, but not as a senior college. And I was
chairman of the committee that recommended and
passed in the House that it be made a full
state-supported school. Because at that time,
Houston
was paying 1 20th of the state taxes.
And
my committee thought that they should have a full
state-supported school. if they're paying that
much taxes.
And the people were there to support it. When I went
through the House journals in your first session
that you were in, there weren't that many ag bills
passed. Why was this? What was most important
during that session?
Well, there wasn't many ag bills paid
because at that particular time,
there weren't many introduced.
And
the tax
bill was the main thing that took up most of the
time. What kind of power, in your opinion, did
Price Daniel have over the House? That was like his
last year as governor. Price Daniel, senior. Yes.
Oh, I thought he did well. I think Price Daniel,
senior, was one of our better governors. I
happened to be on his team. Maybe that's why I think
so. He gave me most everything I asked for. In fact,
my daughter worked for him, too. Peggy worked for
him. Oh, really? During the summer. I noticed
that. She
was secretary at two of his
people that were newspaper people. And she made
out the certificates at the Admiral of the Navy and
et cetera.
Can I tell you a little joke on it? Mm-hmm. Well,
John wasn't too old at that time either, you know.
And so she got a blank, and she filled it out, making
it. John David, king of the apes of the Congo.
And she mailed it officially, put Price Daniels,
she signed, had authority to sign Price Daniels'
name. She signed Price Daniels' name to it and sent
it to him. Oh, it made him so mad. It made him so mad. I
read that he was mascot your first session also,
John David.
Your first session I also read in the journal that
LBJ spoke in front of the House a lot. What kind of
influence did he have over the Texas House, and how
did the Texas House help him in his running for
presidency?
Before that time, you could not hold a public
office and
run for another one. Well, we passed a bill with the
Senate that you could. That made him then eligible
to run for the president. That bill
was passed in no time. He wanted it. He got it. Was
that like for almost anything he wanted? I
wouldn't say that, but he never did ask for it. Oh,
he didn't ask for this? Yeah, he had to have this to
run for president. He was running for president.
Then, of course, Jack Kennedy was nominated
president, and then Kennedy asked him to be his
vice president. And this gave him authority to do
that, this bill did.
I read that you were the... campaign chairman for
rural texans for johnson and humphrey um what area
of texas is involved this is the whole state the
whole state so um what kind of things did you do well
i got uh people from every county that uh put had one
man from every county to uh get out and support uh
like the county judge or the most of what I would
think would be the most influential people. And
then I traveled a lot. And I guess the greatest
thing of that time, the best thing that I did was
asking
Dan Blocker, who we called Hawks Cartwright, to
come down on a weekend and travel and make
speeches. I had a man in Fort Worth that would
furnish a plane,
and he would come down on Friday or Saturday
morning early. We'd throw him out of Hollywood
down here. Maybe that weekend I was going to start
out for work. We're at that time forward.
Fair was going on. And so we flew in there and
started out there and making he made speeches.
Johnson. And we do that. We're not we. He drew the
crowds. People just Those thousands would come
just to hear him and see him in person. Was he from
Texas? Oh, yeah. Oh, I didn't know that. Yeah. Wow.
How did you get that chairmanship? Did Johnson ask
you? Johnson and some of his people knew that I knew
lots of people over the state. When I worked on it, I
would work hard. I wouldn't, you know. That's kind
of braggadocious.
And he
was a very good speaker. Very good speaker.
Blocker? Uh-huh.
And I never will forget, we had... meeting in the
temple. And we filled that whole square up with
prayer in the temple. And when we landed, a little
girl out at the airport, a little girl came up and
gave him some flowers. And she just reached over
and did this. And she ran back to her mother saying,
Mama, I touched him. I touched him. I touched
him. So apparently did he do in Corpus Christi was
very, very large. And the valley was very large. By
having an airplane. We didn't we didn't tear it
along in these places. One all day affair by any
means, we tried to make at least five. And we did
this. I believe five weekends previous to the
election. Hmm. Um, so rural Texans or Texans
really liked LBJ. What did they think of him? What
did, in your opinion?
Well, he carried counties that, uh, that had gone
Republican
previous all the time. And he carried, he carried
the counties. I don't remember the votes. It's,
That's a long go. But actually,
you know, you'd want your native son to be
president or vice president.
I would set up these meetings. whether the county
judges or the district judge, or the
district attorney in the county and the
surrounding counties.
You know, bring people see people got there. We had
had it on radio and TV, etc. In our history class, we
learned that what LBJ called his great society
programs, a lot of domestic programs, how did it
affect Texas and rural America and the cities?
Well, the greatest thing that he did for the rural
people is the REA. And what is that? Rural
electricity.
What we call like a blue body co-op. Oh, like a
co-op? Yeah, but the REA was the mother of the whole
thing. They
furnished, they formed the co-ops. And
he tried to get the private utilities to run
electricity to the farmers, but he didn't. So he
got some money, federal money. And then they
formed these co-ops, like Blue Bonnie, . And
Pertinallis was the largest, Bluebonnet's
largest now. I didn't know that. And I guess
Pertinallis, I did have a list of them here, but I
mean, somewhat. Pertinallis is second, and then
they go on down.
In the 58th, well, the second session that you were
in the House of Representatives, I noticed that
there were a lot of bills passed through the House
for improvement of colleges and universities and
school districts, like pertaining to special
services and teacher salaries and textbooks.
That's right. What kind of impact did it have on,
like, Lee, Bastrop, and Burleson counties? Well,
it just brought in more money for the counties,
like the teachers' pay raise. The speaker was a
James A. Turman had his doctorate, graduated to
Commerce. And he was full, wholehearted for the
teachers. Consequently, he did all he could for
the teachers and for schools. And that's the
reason that there's more done in that session at
that particular time for schools and school
teachers. However, he did not get as much as he
wanted, because at that particular time,
the House and Senate both were very conservative.
Did this area have new school buildings built or
anything like that, just mostly salaries? Mostly
salaries, I'd say. I don't remember whether there
were any new school buildings at that particular
time built
or not. I just don't remember.
As the deputy commissioner in the Ag Department
and as a legislator, how did Texas react to the
civil rights as far as in the House and in the
Agriculture Department? Because this was the
time of big civil rights. Well,
I think it,
I believe it went along fairly well because they
started hiring blacks and Mexican Americans. In
fact, I did the hiring in the agriculture
department.
and i hired quite a few blacks and uh and mexican
americans and
uh of course nationally i would get to get to higher
educated people that hold higher higher jobs for
instance uh ernesto de leon from from
Brownsville. He was a graduate from A&M. He was out
in West Texas. And I went out there and talked to him
into coming with us. And he just quit. Just quit.
He traveled a lot into Mexico and Central America,
selling cattle to Texas.
As far as civil rights, was the House conservative
or liberal about passing it? It was still
conservative. I knew they had to pass it, but it was
still conservative.
Then when
I started the first...
equal rights committee in the state
departments.
I selected two whites, two Anglos, I mean two
blacks, and two Mexican-Americans.
And if any of the people that we had hired out in the
fields
had a quarrel with their boss or they had trouble of
various kinds, they would take this to this
committee. And the committee would vote which was
right, which was wrong. And we did not, I
didn't fire anybody if this committee said it was
right.
Were these men? It was women, too. Oh, women, too?
Well, I'll tell you who. This lady. She's working
there. She left now, Black Lady Lois Jones. I had
her on the committee. And I didn't put the
hierarchy on this committee. I put various people
of degrees of labor. You know, people that did the
common labor and some of the... I believe it was two
people out of,
two or three, two, I guess, out of the main office.
The rest of them were scattered around the state on
this committee, and they would meet every month to
discuss what they thought was right, how they
thought things were going, and equal rights.
After I did that, some of the rest of the
departments followed. Did you hire a lot of women,
or was this an area that women just didn't get into
yet? No, we hired quite a few women. Like down in the
valley,
we even put women to testing
scales, testing
gasoline pumps.
Actually, we were kind of leaders in promoting
women in these jobs.
Well, besides that, can you tell me some other
things that you felt were important some of the
accomplishments and aims and shortcomings that
you had as deputy commissioner because you were in
there for a very long time well
uh i i guess one of the biggest things was the tap
program which uh i thought of that between here and
austin See, I was going back and forth. And when
you're out riding BCF, you can concentrate.
Anyway, I thought about that, this TAF program,
which is agricultural products. And then I had
every car that was
controlled by the Department of Agriculture. A
sign on it. You've seen them,
I know. Mm-hmm. Yeah. Some of my friends lobbied,
teased me, said this is talk about Perrette.
That's a good one. Well... Then we asked... people
like the egg industry, for instance, to put that on
their cartons so that people would know that that
was a Texas egg rather than a Louisiana or
Arkansas. And it helped the
Texas poultry industry considerably. How long
did it take you to instigate this project a
year and a half to talk to all the different we went
around and talked to i say we the the division
people around and then we put up uh point of
purchase signs in the stores saying this is a texas
product And we had even had a foul suit against
some Arkansas people. They had, they got a hold of
it somewhere or another. Tapsig printed on their
cartons and was sending them into Texas. And we
had, we had the law to trace it down, find it. And we
brought a suit. Of course, they quit. Were these
products just sold in Texas, or they went out of the
country or just out of the state? Oh, yeah, they
went out of the state. Did they go out of the
country? Yeah, we sold some stuff to Japan, and we
sold some stuff to Mexico.
And I love Canada. How did the farmers feel about
selling it to people outside our country? Oh,
yeah, they liked it. They liked it because they
were getting the money? Sure, sure, sure. Mexico
bought lots of our cattle. Then we put stations,
cattle stations, I thought of this between here
and Austin, too. And I asked them. Luckily, I had
good friends in the house that would help me to get
the money. And
we put cattle stations in Brownsville, Laredo,
Del Rio, Eagle Pass,
El Paso. And these cattle had to be inspected
by Mexico's vet and our vet. And they would be put in
these pens, and that's where the inspection would
take place.
So who were the legislators that helped you in the
House to get things passed?
When I was deputy commissioner, Bill Heatley,
Paducah,
Sam Collins-Newton,
Bill Hallowell of Grand Chalangin, scattered all
over. Were these men mostly from rural areas that
your programs would help? But you'd be surprised
at that
particular time. The city boys would help you
because a lot of them didn't know anything about
it. And they said, well, Bill, if you know what you
know and you say it's right, I'll go along with you.
I'll vote with you. I just luckily had to trust it
enough to do it.
As Deputy Commissioner, what kind of impact did
LBJ have on the Agriculture Department of Texas?
Did he help you all out in any way? We asked for
something in particular, but we never did ask him
for much of anything. He asked us. Oh, really?
Yeah, he asked us to get some... pecan trees out of
Mexico, and some grapefruit trees out of Mexico.
How did the Vietnam War affect the agriculture
department? Not really? No. I noticed, I tried to
find some information like in the local papers and
things like that, And I could hardly find anything
about what was happening in Texas. It was like they
just wrote about Vietnam. How did you promote,
what other ways did you promote some of the ag
programs and get the information to the people?
Because it didn't seem like they had that much in
the papers. I'll tell you what. We had...
We were what we call tap luncheons.
And we had one in New York. We had one in
all over the state and the larger towns. And it
would be nothing served but Texas products.
And we would invite out-of-town, out-of-state
people to these luncheons.
Have you ever heard of Ms. Corbett? Well, now, she
helped me. She really helped me. In fact, she was in
New York. We were putting this on in New York. And I
wasn't there. I was in the Valley.
And she finally got a hold of me. And Ben Bayesden
was chief of marketing who did Seahawks.
And we shipped so many steaks to New York. I've
forgotten how many it was. Anyway,
she finally got a hold of me in, I believe it was in
Michigan,
and she said, Bill, these states are not worth what
we're trying to do.
Well, I said, I'll tell you what you do. You call the
packing I said, we've been buying these sticks
from here in Texas. And tell them to airmail you the
kind of the sticks that you want. And that I,
certain man there, I said, tell them that I told you
to do it so you'd be sure that they'd get their
money. And she did. She gave these other sticks
away.
And Miss Cook up here at Austin, she put on, she
helped us too. Because it promoted their name.
And I guess the largest one we had was in Dallas.
Unless it had been New York. I wasn't that one in New
York.
Where... I believe it was during the State Fair,
where these out-of-town people, buyers, would be
invited to come to taste these Texas products. And
we sold lots of them. And the people that sold them
were Texas people. And of course, they were there,
too. And then we had another thing there at the
State Fair in Dallas where we promoted the TAP
program. They had one big building up there.
Now, don't take this at heart, but A&M had it. They
called us.
They talked to Ben Bayesden, and Ben said he'd like
to talk to me. So we met them up there at this
building. What A&M was doing, they were
in this building showing Grandma's canned peas
and Grandma's canned... fruits and vegetables
and
fodder and corn and stuff like that. Well, it
wasn't drawing people into the building. And
naturally, they wanted people to come to the fair.
So they turned the building over to us five. And
then we went out and got... Blue Bell, all over the
valley, people that manufactured and canned
fruits and vegetables in East Texas. Then
we'd have a
school choir would come in one weekend or maybe on a
certain day or maybe another band state where
these things were manufactured. And that drew a
lot of people into the building. And
we had a room set off where out of state people would
come. and where we could talk to them and get the
sellers and buyers together. Where a lot of
produce was,
like turkeys and things, all kinds. Is there a tap
building at the fair? Yeah. Now? Yeah. Do you feel
like this program is still successful? It can be
made successful as hard as the people want to make
it. In fact, John White, a gentleman from Dallas,
before all this Iran
stuff started, they went to the embassy in Iran, in
Washington.
had just about completed trading
produce, Texas agricultural products, for oil.
And then all that stuff blew up over there. But
first, the federal government came along and told
us that we could not do that. A state, a lone state,
cannot trade or barter with a foreign country. It
has to go through the federal government. Well,
then you come along with the wheat people would be
against it because they wouldn't have enough
wheat. We didn't raise these other states' rates
and stuff like that. So consequently, they
knocked it in the head to start with. But we would
have sold lots and lots of Texas products if that
could have gone through. Did y'all do that with any
other countries or go through the federal?
Couldn't. The federal government wouldn't let
us. Did you ever go through the federal government
to sell to other countries? In Mexico, we did
cattle, yeah. And, uh, we went to, uh, we would ship
cattle to, uh, Burma and to, uh, Australia, to, uh,
uh, some of the Far East, uh, countries. They
would, uh, we shipped those. We flew them out of,
uh, Houston, all over. Even cattle that these
people bought in Amarillo would be brought to
Houston.
I've seen goats, sheep, hogs, cattle, horses,
astroturf,
all kinds of seed put in one plane. Brammer cattle.
Oh my goodness. You were mentioning A&M, and since
I'm from A&M, how did the universities have an
impact on the agricultural department? I noticed
that like for the TAP program, what I read about it
was as far as seeds and other kind of things, A&M had
a part in it, University of Texas, Texas Tech. Did
they help you all a lot at all? To be honest and
straight with you, he and him were jealous of us.
Why? Because we thought of this program. And
because we were making hay with it. And I don't know
whether Black's still over there or not.
Professor Black? I don't know. And I know he made
the remark around the state that that wasn't nice
and all. In fact, one of them asked me, he said, oh,
y'all will give that up soon, won't you? What they
want to do, they want us to give it up so they can get
it.
But I never did call on them for anything. Like
Tarleton was great on peaches. That's part of
painting, yeah? And some of those... schools,
Texas Tech, they would help us with things that we
might need, help us find things. And A&M did too,
but A&M, they were kind of the hierarchy, not
the...
With the diversity of the state,
what Where did y'all center on most of the time?
Like Central Texas, East Texas, West Texas? I
mean, all over? We had people all over the state.
But y'all didn't really center on any area? No.
Like cattle, mostly East Texas and South Texas.
Wasn't too many from West Texas. There's a few.
There's a lot of sheep and goats out of West Texas.
that went through the Del Rio pens.
What other projects did you help instigate when
you were deputy commissioner? Any other biggies?
I might think so, Matthew Lee.
Those two were the, no question about it, the two of
them, it took lots of time, lots of,
That's where we spent most of our money, because it
was helping the farmer.
Well, seed.
In our seed program, we tested seed in Mexico.
You'd go out here, you had
maize. Well, just as soon as your maize was
harvested and cured, tested, we'd go to Mexico
with it and plant
it. That way, we could tell this grower
what the percent of his, it was county, you know,
and we had a fellow still doing it too, a fellow
named Williams. He's Mexican, but he's,
I ain't gonna look at him. He got Mexican, you know,
he owns part of the land down there. He lives down
there.
We could give him the percentage. you can get the
tag and say percentage of the way it looked,
foreign seed that was in
it. And our people would go down there and stay and
plant it and watch it. They'd come home for a week or
two and go back for it.
We had a seed lab in Houston, which wasn't
anything, not anything. So I talked to a team, gave
me the money, put up this seed lab. Of course, the
seed people, they wanted up McGregor because that
is just about the center of the seed growing in a lot
of south, a lot of west, a lot of not much east, but up
in Vernon and places like that. Well, since I had
the money, I could say where I wanted it.
Consequently, I said, well, I'm going to put it in
my hometown, and I gave some reasons. I said, well,
at that time, I said we had trains coming through,
and we had four truck lines crisscrossing here,
you know, and we could get better service than off,
like McGregor, off on one main highway. And we
had...
the labor that we can get to do it.